Though biotechnology, researchers can modify the phytochemical and nutrient makeup of foods by altering the genetic makeup of plants. Resulting plants are called genetically modified or GM plants. The process of biotechnology usually entails identifying a favorable genetic trait in one plant and transplanting that gene into another plant that lacks the characteristic. The genetic make up of plants has actually been modified for centuries. Some 8000 years ago, Native Americans increased corn yields by cross-fertilizing corn plants. Over the centuries, thousands of plant hybrids have been developed. Hybrids are achieved by combining the genes of different plant species through cross-pollination. Advances related to genetic engineering in recent years have refined techniques so that single genes, rather than the full complements of a plant’s genetic makeup, can be transferred to another plant. Genetic engineering is now used to transfer disease-resistant genes from one plant to another plant, conferring upon it an improved ability to resist disease. Flavor genes can be transported from one plant to another, creating new taste sensations like garbanzo beans with a nutty, peppery taste and basil preseasoned with cinnamon. Watermelon and oranges have had their seeds removed through genetic engineering. Colors of vegetables and fruits can be modified by transferring the appropriate genes from one plant to another. Thanks to two genes from the snap dragon, you can buy purple tomatoes rich in anthocyanin, a dark-blue antioxidant pigment. Carrots have been modified to be dark red so they would match Texas A&M’s school color. Tomatoes have been genetically altered to stay firm during shipment and to produce 10 times the normal amount of lycopene; and rice has been altered to be rich in beta-carotene, the precursor of vitamin A. High beta-carotene rice was produced to make a good source of vitamin A available to people in countries where vitamin A deficiency is widespread. Called golden rice, it contains two genes extracted from daffodils and one bacterial gene that together lead to the production of beta-carotene within rice seeds. Food biotechnology applies to foods derived from animals as well as plants. Scientists have engineered the DNA of Atlantic salmon so that they grow to market weight in 18 rather than the usual 24 to 30 months. Pigs that produce less smelly stools and gas, cattle with leaner muscles, and hens that lay more eggs are also products of animal genetic engineering. Some of the new, genetically modified animal foods are the result of cloning. Cloning is accomplished by removing the nucleus of a donor egg obtained from a cow or pig, for example, and replacing it with the nucleus of an animal with desired characteristics, such as tender meat or high milk yield. The new nucleus is fused to the donor egg by electricity, is allowed to divide several times, and is then transplanted into a surrogate mother. The offspring produced is an identical copy of the animal whose nucleus was transplanted and is able to reproduce. Cloned animals are expensive and are not being used to produce food products. Their offspring are used to a limited extent. Currently, animal products obtained from cloned animals make up only a small fraction of meat sales. Production of cloned animals, and sale of meat products from these animals, are regulated by the United States Department of Agriculture and the Food and Drug Administration.